                 How to Use This Book 

This Book of Lore is designed to he used with the
DUNJONQUEST game, The Temple of Apshai. Part of it tells you
how to play the game, and provides you with background about
the temple and the world in which it exists. The other part 
provides information that you will need while you are
playing the game.

We suggest that you read through the Introduction, "How to 
Play," and "The Adventures of Brian Hammerhand" before you
begin play. The Introduction will introduce you to fantasy
role playing games if you aren't already familiar with them
If you are, the Introduction will explain the differences
from other fantasy games you may have encountered in the
past. "How lo Play" explains the mechanics of play in
detail. You will probably want to read through this section
quickly now, then refer to it during your first game. Don't
be intimidated by its length. The length just comes from the
number of options you have available to you. Each action you 
take during play is simple and natural. "The Adventures of
Brian Hammerhand" is a fun way of introducing you to our
fantasy world. 

After you have started play, you will need to refer to the
"Chambers of the Dunjon" section. Within the game (and as
explained in the "How to Play" section) you will find
references to rooms within the dungeon These rooms are
described, in more or less detail depending on the room,
in "The Chambers of the Dunjon." Each room is numbered so
that you can look it up quickly. The sections on monsters,
traps, and treasures also provide a reference that you will
need during play. Since they are short though, you may want
to look them over before entering the dungeon so that you
will have more of an idea of what you may find there 

                    Introduction 

Did you grow up in the company of the Brothers Grimm, Snow
White, The Red Fairy Book, Flash Gordon serials, The Three
Musketeers, the Knights of the Round Table, or any of the
three versions of The Thief of Bagdad? Have you read The
Lord of the Rings, The Worm Ouroboros, The Incomplete
Enchanter, or Conan the Conqueror? Have you ever wished you
could cross swords just for fun with Cyrano or D'Artagnan,
or stand by their sides in the chill light of dawn, awaiting
the arrival of the Cardinal's Guard? Ever wondered how you'd
have done against the Gorgon, the hydra, the bane of Heorot
Hall, or the bull that walks like a man? Would you have
sailed with Sinbad or Captain Blood, sought passage on the
ship of Ishtar, or drunk of the Well at World's End? Did
Aphrodite make Paris an offer you couldn't refuse? Would you
seek a red-hued maiden beneath the hurtling moons of
Barsoom, or walk the glory road with "Dr. Balsamo," knowing
it might be a oneway street? 

If any or all of your answers are "yes" you're a player of
role playing games or you ought to be, (If your answers
are all "no," you have either stepped through the looking
glass by mistake, or Fate knows your destiny better than you
do.) 

Role playing games (RPGs) allow you a chance to step outside
a world grown too prosaic for magic and monsters, doomed
cities and damsels in distress . . . and enter instead a
universe in which only quick wits, the strength of your
sword arm, and a strangely carved talisman around your neck
may be the only things separating you from a pharaoh's
treasure or the mandibles of a giant mantis. 

The standard (non-computer) role playing game is not, in its
commercial incarnation, much more than a rulebook a set of
guidelines a person uses to create a world colored by myth
and legend, populated by brawny heroes, skilled swordsmen,
skulking thieves, cunning wizards, hardy Amazons, and comely
wenches, and filled with cursed treasures, spell-forged
blades, flying carpets, rings of power, loathsome beasts,
dark towers, and cities that stood in the Thousand Nights
and a Night if not The Outline of History. 

Role playing games are not so much "played" as they are
experienced. Instead of manipulating an army of chessmen
about an abstract but visible board, or following a single
piece around and around a well-defined track, collecting
$200 every time you pass Go, in RPGs you venture into an
essentially unknown world with a single piece your alter ego
for the game, a character at home in a world of demons and
darkness, dragons and dwarves. You see with the eyes of your 
character a scene described by the "author" of the adventure
- and no more.

There is no board in view, no chance squares to inspect; the
imaginary landscape exists only in the notebooks of the
world's creator (commonly called a referee or dunjonmaster)
and, gradually, in the imaginations of your fellow players.
As you set off in quest of fame and fortune in company with
those other player characters, you are both a character in
and a reader of an epic you are helping to create. Your
character does whatever you wish him to do, subject to his
human (or near-human) capabilities and the vagaries of
chance. Fight, flee, or parley; take the high road or low:
the choice is yours. You may climb a mountain or go around
it, but since at the top may be a rock, a roc's egg, or a
roc, you can find challenge and conflict without fighting
with your fellow players, who are usually (in several
senses) in the same boat. 

Role-playing games can (and often do) become, for both you
and your character, a way of life. Your character does not
stop existing at the end of a game session; normally, you
use the same character again and again until he dies for a
final time and cannot be brought back to life by even the
sorcerous means typically available. In the meantime, he
will have grown richer on the treasure he (you) has
accumulated from adventure to adventure, may have purchased
new and better equipment, won magic weapons to help him
fight better or protective devices to keep him safe. As he
gains experience from his adventures, he grows in power,
strength, and skill - although the mechanics and terminology
of this process vary greatly from one set of rules to
another. Aside from keeping a running total of "experience
points" from one adventure to another, you need not concern
yourself much with this, since in DUNJONQUEST the computer
will make the necessary adjustments to your character.

Ordinary role-playing games require a group of reasonably
experienced players, an imaginative and knowledgeable
referee dunjonmaster willing to put in the tremendous amount
of time necessary to construct a functioning fantasy world,
and large chunks of playing time, since the usual game
session lasts four to eight hours (although twenty hour
marathons are not unheard of). DUNJONQUEST solves those
problems by offering an already created world with enough
detail and variety for dozens of adventures. There is only a
single character - your character - pitted against the
denizens of the dunjon at any one time, but you can play for
just as long or short a period as you like, and return
whenever you feel like it. While there are greater practical
limits to your actions than is usually the case in a
non-computer RPG, there are stilt a large number of options
to choose from. 

Much of your time in the dunjon will be spent exploring the
rooms, searching for treasure, or fighting the hostile
denizens there who are reluctant both to relinquish their
hoards and to allow any adventurer out of their clutches.
While all monsters in the dunjon are basically hostile,
they come in various sizes, shapes and degrees of nastiness.
While one creature may go down from a single blow, another
may take half a dozen and remain standing. 

If you (and your character) are new to RPG adventuring, you
should begin with the first level of the dunjon. Lower
levels are progressively more dangerous, inhabited by
deadlier monsters, and their typically more enticing
treasures should be sought only after you have become more
familiar with the system, and your character has acquired
experience, good equipment, and perhaps some magical aids. 

Any activity in the dunjon is potentially tiring, and
fatigue is a nearly constant consideration. A young, healthy
adventurer who is lightly armed and not loaded down with
treasure may trot through the dunjon at a good pace without
tiring much. A heavier load or a loss of blood caused by
wounds would necessarily reduce his pace - or force him to
stop periodically to rest. If you go too slowly, some of the
dunjon's hungrier inhabitants are more likely to come across
you. 

Combat, of course, is a frequent occurrence, and one of the
central features of the DUNJONQUEST series is a combat
system designed to mirror with some degree of fidelity the
nature of sword-and-shield fighting. Hundreds of things
might happen in a hand-to hand battle: your weapon might
break; you might slip in a puddle of blood or trip over a
fallen body; a shield might splinter; you might put an arrow
right into the eye socket of an otherwise nearly
invulnerable beast. However, systems which attempt to allow
for huge numbers of these possibilities are tedious at best
and, because they almost necessarily overemphasize such
unusual occurrences, are statistically as inaccurate as
simpler systems. Historical research, a knowledge of various
martial arts, and practical expenence in the Society for
Creative Anachronism (a group of medieval enthusiasts who
get together in tournaments and similar affairs to bash each
other about energetically with authentic imitations of the
weaponry of the Middle Ages) have all gone into designing a
system which, while simpler than some, is as accurate as any
and far more authentic than most. Although you cannot, in
DUNJONQUEST, succeed in chopping your own leg off (which a
particularly clumsy person might in fact manage), a great
many variables of equipment, strength, coordination, skill,
practice, etc., are involved in determining the outcome of
any particular battle. Fortunately, the procedure need not
concern even a first-time player, since the computer is
doing all the work. 

It is, however, perhaps relevant to note that fighting for
your life with a sword and shield is, naturally, even more
strenuous than running. If you (which is to say, your
character) are of average strength and are burdened down
with heavy equipment - to say nothing of the sacks of
treasure you're looking for you may soon get so tired you
can no longer defend yourself. 

                   CHARACTERS AND EQUIPMENT 

As in other role-playing games, in DUNJONQUEST the
incredibly complex factors that make up the simplest human
being have been abstracted into a few basic characteristics,
rated numerically from a low of 3, through an average of 10
or 11, to a high of 18. The higher the number, the greater
higher stronger is the attribute. A 90-lb. weakling might
have a Strength of 6 or less, while the average football
player would have a Strength of 14 or more. These numbers
are typically obtained by rolling three dice; in this case,
however, the computer generates them randomly.

There are six basic attributes - three physical and three
mental - used in DUNJONQUEST to give a unique and
distinctive character to a dunjon adventurer.

Strength, fairly obviously, is a determination of how
physically strong your character is: how much weight (of
treasure and equipment) he can carry, for instance. It also
controls how heavy a weapon he can use and how much damage
one of his blows will do to whomever (or whatever) he's
fighting.

Constitution is a measure of health and endurance - general
physical fitness. The higher the Constitution, the farther a
character can run before collapsing, and the more wounds he
can sustain before dying. Since the ability to move or fight
without becoming exhausted is also largely responsible for
keeping an adventurer alive, this is perhaps the single most
important attribute. 

Dexterity is a matter of reflexes, coordination, and even
eyesight. Someone with high Dexterity has an edge in weapons
use: he's more likely to hit what he's aiming at and is
better at keeping his shield between an attacking weapon,
claw, or mandible and his fragile self. Someone with a
really low Dexterity might be so clumsy he would have
trouble hitting a locked door without a running start.

Intelligence is reasonably self explanatory, although in
DUNJONQUEST it is limited to what might be termed left brain
intelligence: the ability to reason logically and to express
oneself verbally In many systems (including the one on 
which DUNJONQUEST is based), this is connected with the
ability to work magic. In DUNJONQUEST the major function of
Intelligence is to affect a character's ability to bargain
with the innkeeper or to parley with monsters.

Intuition, the complement of Intelligence, is a measure of
right brain functions (real and hypothetical): spatial
perception, getting an answer from "inadequate" data, an
awareness of the spintual or mystical aspects of the
unverse, ESP, and luck. Someone with a high Intuition is
more likely to detect secret doors, traps, and unpleasant
surprises; with an exceptionally low Intuition a character
might be doing well to find an open doorway without a
signpost.

Ego measures mental toughness and willpower. A character
with a strong Ego can more easily influence others (the
innkeeper or monsters) and is more likely to fight fiercely
despite his wounds ("when the going gets tough, the tough
get going," as the saying goes) Someone with a weak Ego
will not do as well when the tide of battle turns against
him.

All three physical attributes may influence your choice of
equipment, which, in DUNJONQUEST, includes five kinds of
bladed weapons (swords), a bow and arrows, five types of
armor, and two different sizes of shields. Generally, the
bigger, heavier, and more expensive an item, the more
effective it is, although heavier equipment is more tiring
to wear use carry. A larger sword is naturally capable of
doing more damage than a smaller one (though not every
time), but it takes more strength to use; a character with a
low Strength is restricted to the lighter weapons. The most
powerful weapon, a greatsword, requires two hands and,
consequently, cannot be used with a shield. 

Because it is not fatiguing and is, at least until a monster
gets within chomping range, the safest form of combat,
firing arrows at a beastie from a distance is often
desirable. However, arrows will only hit if the monster is
on a straight line vertically or horizontally away from you,
and a good sword blow may very likely do more damage. Trying
to play Robin Hood while an unpleasant critter with claws
and teeth is chewing on your arm is also dangerous, but
distance shooting certainly saves wear and tear on the
armor.

If you are hit bit struck, the armor you are wearing will
protect you from some damage (the claw bite stinger has to
penetrate a layer of leather or steel to get at the stuff
that counts - your tender flesh); plate armor naturally
provides much more protection than leather. Shields make it
harder for you to be hit, although a particularly good
strike chomp may glance off the shield onto a more
vulnerable area or may even (if the monster is big enough
and sufficiently hungry) take a chunk out of the shield, the
armored sleeve, and your (character's) body. A large shield
is, obviously, a bigger barrier to such incursions than a
smaller one, but in the hands of a character with high
Dexterity a small shield may be nearly as effective. 

             CHARACTERS FROM OTHER GAMES 

If you have played other RPGs and wish to bring one of your
favorite characters from another game into the dunjon, you
are welcome to do so; instead of having the innkeeper create
a new character for you, enter the attributes of your old
one. (Note, however, that these must be within DUNJONQUEST's
"human" range of 3-18.) Depending on the game system you are
used to using, you can substitute Intuition for Wisdom,
Luck, or Power, and Ego for Charisma; while these are not
exact correspondences, this is the easiest method of
"translation." 

If you are bringing in "high-level" characters, you should
be aware of certain important differences between
DUNJONQUEST and other systems. Neither attributes nor
"hit points" are raised wholesale with increases in
experience. A 10th level fighter is formidable but not a
Sherman tank. Also, the limits of a microcomputer based
system do not yet permit the use of all the different sorts
of magic items you may have picked up in other games.

If you wish to buy things from the innkeeper, you should
note that DUNJONQUEST is on the silver standard. If you are
used to playing on a gold standard, please alter your gold
pieces to silver and your silver to copper. (You may reverse
the process if you wish to take DUNJONQUEST treasure back
into your usual game world.)

The upper levels of The Temple of Apshai are appropriate for
1st-3rd level characters, while Ihe lower levels are more
suited to 4th -6th level characters. Being essentially an
introductory dunjon, Apshai is not designed for still higher
level characters, although even they may find an occasional
challenge within.

We invite you to project yourself into the labyrinth. See
and touch the treasures, hear and smell the creatures that
inhabit the place. Discover for yourself ihe fantasy world
of Apshai!

                      How To Play 

It's easy to learn to play DUNJONQUEST. Since the rules of
the game are actually programmed into the computer's memory,
there is very little you need to know to play the game.
There are, however, a few basic things you should be
familiar with to make the best decisions during play. The
following paragraphs describe the use of the INNKEEPER and
DUNJONMASTER segments of the game system, the commands for
controlling your character, gaining experience, evaluating
treasure, and resurrecting a character who dies. The final
section describes what to expect from the monsters
inhabiting the dungeon. The specific monsters are described
in more detail in the Monsters of Apshai section. You will
find that all of this becomes very clear when you play the
game.

                     THE INNKEEPER 

The INNKEEPER creates a character - your playing piece for
the game. This simply involves answering yea or nay to a
series of questions put to you by the INNKEEPER. 

Generating a Character 

As you enter the Inn, the INNKEEPER greets you and asks if
he should create a character for you. For your first game
you'll probably want the INNKEEPER to create one for you, so
you would want to answer YEA to his question. In later
forays into the dungeon you may want to enter in characters
created in other fantasy role playing games, or you may want
to reuse a previously generated character (see EXPERIENCE).
You may take the same character into the dungeon as often as
you like, or until the character dies {see ON DEATH AND
DYING).

If you have answered YEA, the INNKEEPER generates a
character randomly and displays its attributes on the
screen. For example:
    INTELLIGENCE   10 
    INTUITION       7 
    EGO             9 
    STRENGTH       14 
    CONSTITUTION   11 
    DEXTERITY       9 
    THOU HAST 125 PIECES OF SILVER 
    CHARACTER NAME? 

Once you have decided on a name for yourself, all of the
above information should be written down so that you can
reuse it at a later date.

Silver pieces are your spending money for the supplies you
need in the dungeon. The INNKEEPER will keep track for you
of how many silver pieces you spend until you enter the
dungeon. At that point, the INNKEEPER forgets, so you should
make a note of how many you have left after you have
purchased your equipment.

Purchasing Equipment 

The INNKEEPER will query you for purchases of swords,
shields, armor, a bow, arrows, and healing salves. For each
of the first three categories, several items are listed in
the order of their effectiveness, with the first item being
the least effective. For example, under armor the INNKEEPER
displays the following list: 

    TYPE          WEIGHT OFFERED PRICE
    LEATHER          9         30 
    RING MAIL       22        100 
    CHAIN MAIL      31        150 
    PARTIAL PLATE   47        250 
    FULL PLATE      63       1000 

Leather armor is the least effective type and full plate is
the best. It is also true that the more effective types of
weapons and armor weigh more, which has an effect on the
amount of fatigue you expend (see FATIGUE). 

Bargaining for Your Equipment 

Appearing next to each item for sale is an "offered price."
You can bargain with the INNKEEPER to buy an item for less
by entering a number less than the suggested price. You can,
however, only purchase those items listed. Any other items,
such as magic weapons, magic armor, and, alas, more money,
have to be found in the dungeon.

Levels of Play 

There are two ways in which you can control the level of
difficulty of the game. The first is by choosing the dungeon
level (1 through 4). These are arranged by relative
difficulty with the first level being the least difficult.

You may also choose from among three monster speeds: slow,
medium or fast. This speed controls the amount of time you
have to react to an encounter with a monster. Depending on
the speed you choose, a monster will allow you a certain
fixed amount of time to choose your course of action before
it attacks you. However, once you execute a command, the
monster will immediately take its move whether or not you've
used up your time allocation for the turn. Now get ready to
tackle the monsters. 

THE DUNJONMASTER 

Entering and Exiting the Dungeon 

When you first enter the dungeon, you will be just inside
the door of the first room on that level. You will always
enter a level of the dungeon at the same place. From that
point on, you are free to roam about on the level as you
please. To leave the dungeon or to move to a different
level, you must first exit the dungeon, then re-enter at the
entrance to the next level. Each of the four levels of the
dungeon are described m detail in the Chambers of the Dunjon
section.

The Display 

The DUNJONMASTER both draws a map of a portion of the
dungeon and displays your status, including the number of
the room you are currently in, your physical condition, and
how much weight you are currently carrying. Part of the
display is reserved for reporting messages that are of
immediate importance to you (see Figure 1). There are a
number of possible messages, and more than one of these may
appear at the same time. These messages are self-explanatory
during play, but a few are included in Figure 1 as an
example. The circled numbers in the figure correspond to the
descriptions under the sample display.


Figure 1.                 (1) ROOM NO. 52 
Sample Display            (2) WOUNDS: 100% 
                          (3) FATIGUE: 100% 
                          (4) WGT: 42 LBS 
                          (5) MONSTER SLAIN! 
                          (6) CRUNCH! 
                              SHIELD HIT! 
                          (7) ARROWS: 23 
                              MAG AR: 3 
                          (8) ANT MAN 

                          (9) TOTAL SLAIN: 
                              21 

KEY DESCRIPTION 

(1) This number is the number of the room you are currently
    in. Passageways are also assigned room numbers.

(2) Shows that, at the moment, you are not wounded. See ON
    DEATH AND DYING. 
  
(3) Shows that you have all of your endurance available. See
    FATIGUE.
  
(4) Shows how much weight you are carrying.

(5) Lines (5), (6), and (8) only appear when appropriate.
    Line (5) shows that you killed the monster you last
  fought with.

(6) These two messages show how you fared during the last
    round of combat. The first line shows that you hit the
    monster while the second shows that he hit your shield.
  Again the specific messages vary with the situation.
  Unless you are in combat, there will be no message here.

(7) Shows how many normal and magic arrows you have left
    (see Attacking with Bow).

(8) Shows the name of the monster currently in contact with
    you. The name shown depends on the monster type present.

(9) Shows the total number of monsters you have slain in
    this foray.

COMMANDS 

Altogether there are 18 commands available to you for
maneuvering your character through the dungeon. These
commands are discussed under three major headings: movement,
special, and attack commands. Tables 1 through 3 summarize
these commands and their meanings, and each is described in
the following paragraphs. Note that none of the commands in
Tables 1 through 3 should be followed by a carriage return.
Type only the appropriate key.

Table 1. Movement Commands 

  What You Enter     Meaning 
  *0 to 9            Move forward to 9 feet
  R                  Turn right 
  L                  Turn left 
  V                  Turn around (volte face) 

Table 2. Special Commands 

  What You Enter     Meaning 
  O                  Open door 
  E                  Examine wall for secret door
  S                  Search for traps
  G                  Grab treasure
  D                  Drop treasure - followed by message
                     DROP SOME - enter the two digit number
                     of the treasure you want to drop
  Q                  Hearken (query) 
  !                  Speak with monster
  H                  Apply one healing salve 
  Y                  Drink a healing potion 

Table 3. Attack Commands 

  What You Enter     Meaning 
  A                  Normal attack 
  T                  Thrust 
  P                  Parry 
  F                  Fire a normal arrow 
  M                  Fire a magic arrow 

Movement 

There are four commands that allow you to move from one spot
to another (see Table 1). During a turn you may move up to
nine feet. Moving forward always takes one full turn,
regardless of how jar you move. The distance just indicates
the speed you move at. You may also turn to the right or
left, or turn around. Since turning does not take any time,
you may combine it with your forward movement for one turn.

To move out of the space you are in, you must move forward.
Therefore, for example, to take two steps backward, you must
first turn around, then move two feel forward. On Ihe next
turn you may turn about again.

Note that to move, you must enter a whole number from to 9.
You cannot use fractions or decimals. Do not enter a " + "
in front of the number and do not type 09. Type only the
number itself: 9.

It is also important to remember thai (although the actual
speed varies) moving at maximum speed makes you tired (see
FATIGUE). You should not need to run for more than a few
turns at a time since a monster will never follow you out of
a room. (Of course, if there's a monster in ihe next room
. . .) 

Special Commands 

The nine special commands vary from healing yourself to
attempting to talk to a monster. Each of these commands is
summarized in Table 2 and described in the following
paragraphs.

Opening Doors. One thing that you'll be doing a lot in the
dungeon is opening doors. Nearly every room has at least one
(see also Secret Doors) To go through it, you must first
open it. Go up to within one fool of the door and face it.
You can then open it by typing the letter O (no carriage
return needed). The door will then open (showing the next
room if there is space on the display to do so) and you can
move through it.

Once you open a door, it will stay open until you "reset"
that level. That is, if you go on to a different level of
the dungeon and then return to the current level, or if you
turn off the computer for a while, thai level will reset,
and all doors will reclose until the next time you open
them. You can return to the Inn without resetting the level.

Secret Doors. Secret doors work similarly to regular doors,
except since they are hidden from view, you must first
search for them using the E command (see Table 2 ) You must
be facing the wall you want to examine, but you do not have
to be near the wall. For example, you could systematically
search for secret doors by turning to face each wall in turn
while standing in the middle of a room.

Whenever you search for and find a secret door, the message:
           A SECRET DOOR!
flashes on the screen and the location becomes visible. You
may then position yourself and open the door normally using
the O command.

There is a chance that you will miss a secret door, so you
may want to double check just to be sure. Don't be too
surprised either if you find that after going through a
secret door, you have trouble finding it again. Perhaps a
passing monster has come by and closed it.

Traps. A trap may come in any one of a number of forms
ranging from darts that spring out from a treasure chest to
a pit in the floor of the room. They can be anywhere in a
room, but a room does not have to be trapped. You can search
for a trap using the S command described in Table 2. As with
secret doors, it is possible to miss a trap, but again, you
can search all you want. When you search for and find a
trap, its location becomes obvious and you can usually avoid
it by going around it or leaping over it. To leap over a
trap, you only need to avoid stopping too near it. For
example, if you know a trap is three feet directly in front
of you, you can avoid it by moving six or more feet forward.

Finding Treasure. All treasures in the dungeon are described
in the Treasures of Apshat section. To find out what kind of
treasure is in a particular room, you must first move to
within one foot and grab it, (Before doing so, it may be
wise to search for traps.) This is done by typing the letter
G. The DUNJONMASTER then displays the number of that
treasure which can be referenced to the Treasures of Apshai
section. The DUNJONMASTER keeps track of all of your
treasure for you and lists each at the end of your
adventure, back at the Inn (refer to EVALUATING TREASURE).

Note that if you find a sword in the dungeon, you must leave
behind your old sword before you can use the new one. Swords
are jealous of their possessors attentions! You always have
the option of ignoring the new sword and keeping your old
one.

Magical Treasures. Some of the treasures in the dungeon are
magical in nature. These items have special properties,
which are sometimes lost when the item is removed from the
dungeon. For example, you might be fortunate enough to find
a ring that helps shield you from attack. But if you should
take that ring out of the dungeon and then return with it
later (i.e. you turn off the computer), that ring would no
longer help you because its magical powers would be gone. On
the other hand, a sword would most likely retain its magical
properties after you leave the dungeon.

Dropping Treasure. If you should decide after picking up a
treasure that you don't want it, you can put it down again
at any time by typing the letter D and then entering the
number of the treasure you want to drop (see Table 2). When
dropping treasure, the number must contain two digits. For
example, to drop treasure number 1, you would enter: 01. To
drop treasure number 19, you would type: 19. Note that you
cannot drop treasures that you do not have.

Hearken. All characters visiting the dungeon have special
listening powers. By typing the letter Q (see Table 2) you
can sense the presence of another creature in the next room,
even on the other side of a wall or closed door. This
command only works if you are facing the wall or door you
want to listen at. It is similar to the find traps and
secret door commands in that there is a percentage chance
you will not hear anything, even if there really is a
monster lurking in wait for you. When this command is used
the DUNJONMASTER tells you thai you found NOTHING or the
name of the lurking creature.

Speaking with Monsters, Speaking with monsters is another
ability you have as a traveller in the dungeon. The command
(see Table 2 again) gives you a chance to avoid fighting
with a monster. If the monster is in a good mood when you
speak to it, it will tell you to pass by and leave any
treasure it is guarding untouched. However, if you then
attack it or disturb the treasure, the monster will pursue
you. But beware! Some monsters hate all adventurers!

Healing. There are two items you may use to heal your
wounds: salves and potions. Either of these may be taken at
any time, including during combat. However, the monster
would then get a free swing. You can rest while you are
healing yourself.

Salves. Each salve, purchasable from the INNKEEPER, will
heal some of the wounds you have taken. This percentage will
vary from time to time. The DUNJONMASTER keeps track of how
many you have, and, upon applying one (by typing the letter
H) automatically adjusts the count remaining. You can see
the change on the WOUNDS portion of the display. If you
attempt to use more salves than you have available, the
DUNJONMASTER will display the message:

                     NONE LEFT 

Potions. These valuable items work the same way as salves,
except potions are more powerful and heal a larger
percentage of your wounds. Potions must be found as treasure
and cannot be purchased from the INNKEEPER. To execute this
command, type the letter Y.

Attack Commands 

There are five types of attacks to choose from during a
given turn: normal attack, thrust, parry, fire a normal
arrow, and fire a magic arrow (see Table 3). As always, none
of these commands should be followed with a carriage return.

Attacking with Sword. To attack with sword, you do not have
to be facing the monster, but you do have to be close. If
you try to attack when you are not within range, the
DUNJONMASTER will display the message: 

                   TOO EAR TO HIT 

and you will instead rest while the monster charges you.

A normal attack is a simple swing of the sword, whereas a
thrust is an all out attack. A thrust increases your chances
to hit and damage the monster, but it also makes it easier
for the monster to hit you. A thrust also costs
substantially more in fatigue. For a normal attack, type the
letter A; for a thrust, type T.

A parry helps shield you against the monster's attack while
conserving fatigue, but it makes it more difficult for you
to hit the monster. Parrying allows you to rest without
letting your guard down, A parry is executed using the P
command.

Attacking with Bow. When attacking with a bow, you must be
facing the monster (and the further away the better, since
he cannot hurt you unless he is within the melee distance).
If you try to fire an arrow while the monster is within
striking range of you, it becomes much easier for the
monster to hit you (you cannot fend off his attack).

Both normal and magic arrows are good long range weapons:
however, a magic arrow is more likely to hit its target and
it does more damage. Magic arrows can only be found in the
dungeon, since no one who has them is likely to sell them.
Firing either type of arrow generally allows you to regain
spent fatigue. To fire a normal arrow, type the letter F. To
fire a magic arrow (assuming you have one) type the letter
M.

FATIGUE 

Expending Fatigue 

Your fatigue rating simply determines how much energy you
have at any given time. Exceptional exertion results in
spent fatigue, but what constitutes exceptional exertion and
how much fatigue you expend depends on your character.
Walking normally and firing arrows generally allow you to
regain fatigue. Activities such as running, fighting, and
carrying heavy loads all cost varying amounts of energy.

The amount of energy you expend for any activity is also
affected by the wounds you have taken. The more wounded you
are, the more it costs you in fatigue to perform an
activity.

If you use up more fatigue than you have (if a negative
number is displayed for FATIGUE), you fall on the floor and
pant. You will not be allowed to attack or move until you
have recovered (that is, until a positive number is
displayed). 

The DUNJONMASTER keeps track of and displays for you the
amount of energy you have left. Therefore, if the display
reads:

                  FATIGUE: 100%

you have all of your energy available.

Regaining Spent Fatigue 

While you cannot accumulate more energy than you started
with, you can regain previously spent energy in a variety of
ways. The fastest way is to stop your movement altogether
(although this may be dangerous). You can also regain it
while firing an arrow or simply walking more slowly.
Executing any of the special commands also allows you to
gain back fatigue. Each time you rest, however, you have a
chance of meeting a wandering monster (see MONSTERS).

EXPERIENCE 

Each time that you successfully venture into the dungeon you
acquire experience points, which basically means you become
a better and more powerful adventurer. This number is
determined for you by the DUNJONMASTER and is based on what
you accomplish while in the dungeon. Essentially, as you
gain experience, you become able to handle more difficult
situations.

More specifically, you will notice improvements in your
character. These improvements come in "jumps" and may not be
immediately obvious. One improvement is that it becomes
easier for you to hit a monster and more difficult for the
monsler to hit you.

Once the program is loaded, it keeps track of your
experience points on a cumulative basis. That is, if you
return to the Inn to purchase more supplies, the
DUNJONMASTER remembers how many experience points you earned
on that adventure and adds it to the experience you get on
the next adventure. The DUNJONMASTER will continue to do
this until you turn off the computer or until you generate a
new character. At that point it forgets all of your
experience. If you intend to keep a character for use in
future sessions, you should make a note of the final number
of experience points before you turn off the computer. This
number can be re-entered at the beginning of a new session
and the DUNJONMASTER will add any new experience to that
number.

EVALUATING TREASURE 

Once you are safely back at ihe Inn, the INNKEEPER lists all
of the treasure you found during the adventure. From there
you must determine the value of each item using the treasure
key in the Treasures of Apshai section and add them together
along with any money you had previously. If you intend to
keep your character for use in future sessions, you should
make a note of the total so that you can re-enter it at a
later time. Likewise, you should make a record of all of
your possessions, including the number of normal and magic
arrows you have left, the type of armor and weapons you
have, etc. Also note any changes in your attributes, since
these are permanent and must carry over from adventure to
adventure.

ON DEATH AND DYING 

Wounds 

Any time a monster attacks you, there is a chance (depending
on the type of armor you are wearing) that it will penetrate
your armor and wound you. The DUNJONMASTER keeps track of
and displays how much damage you have taken on a percentage
basis. The number displayed next to WOUNDS is always the
percentage that you have left. For example, if the display
reads: 

                      WOUNDS: 90% 

you are still relatively healthy because only 10% of you has
been wounded.

You may heal yourself at any time with either a salve or a
potion (see Healing). You can continue to function normally
until you reach 0% or less (except that your fatigue
expenditure increases). At that point you are dead. However,
there is a chance you can be "raised from the dead." The
following paragraphs explain this phenomenon in more detail.

Getting Yourself Resurrected 

If after all that hard work you should find yourself dead,
don't panic. All may not yet be lost. After all, you are not
the only adventurer in the dungeon and some kind soul,
having stumbled across your body lying on the floor, may
drag you out to safety and see to it that you are
resurrected. Of course, for having gone to all the trouble,
he would most likely want something in return as a thank
you.

If you should die, you may simply be eaten by a wandering
monster. This is the worst case. You may also be found by
one of three characters: a dwarf, a wizard, or a cleric, all
of whom will ask for some type of payment. The DUNJONMASTER
tells you immediately which of the four cases has occurred.

Monsters. If you are found by a monster, your character and
all its possessions will be eaten. Fresh adventurer is
considered to be a delicacy by the monsters inhabiting the
dungeon.

The Dwarf. The second worst case is to be found by Olias the
Dwarf. While he will not eat you, he will take all your
money, including any gems and jewels, and any magical items
you might have. This includes magic swords, armor, and
arrows. You will be alive, but you will be very poor.

The Magic-User. Lowenthal the wizard is only slightly easier
to please than Olias. In return for your life, he will take
any special magical items you might have, leaving you with
your cash, gems, jewels, weapons, and armor.

The Cleric. The fortunate ones will be found by Benedic the
wandering priest. This kind soul (if he can find his way out
of the dungeon), after resurrecting you will simply ask that
you make a donation to his sect after you get back to the
Inn.

MONSTERS 

Although a complete description of the types of monsters in
the dungeon is contained in the Monsters of Apshai section,
it is helpful to know that monsters can be either fixed or
wandering. With a fixed monster, each time you read in a
level of the dungeon, that monster (and all other items)
reappears exactly where it was previously. These monsters
are normally there to guard a particular treasure. A
wandering monster is generated randomly by the DUNJONMASTER
and may appear anywhere at any time on the appropriate
level. You do not have to fear running into the most
powerful monsters on the first level of the dungeon. Some
discretion is used in generating them and only first level
monsters are generated for the first level of the dungeon.
Don't be surprised though, if you find what first appears to
be the same monster on more than one level and then discover
it to be tougher than you remembered. 

Neither fixed nor wandering monsters ever follow you out of
a room, but unless you kill a monster, it will be waiting
for you when you go back into that room.

                   The Adventures 
                         of 
                  Brian Hammerhand 

PROLOGUE 

Landfall at last! 

Don't get me wrong, now, chum. Shipboard life can be
enjoyable. You meet a lot of interesting people thieves,
exiles, fugitives, and the like - most of them as willing as
I to gamble a week's wages on a cast of the bones. And so
far as I can tell, being swallowed by a sea serpent can't be
much different from being chewed up by any of the foul
creatures on Geb's good earth. It's just that I'm infantry
born and bred, and you can't ground your spear against a
charge at sea. Besides, this leather armor may float all
right, but it wouldn't stop a wasp sting, much less a
pirate's arrow.

Staggering down the gangway my legs yet unaccustomed to
treading a stable surface my ears were assaulted by raucous
mixture of music and shouting carried downwind from the only
tavern in evidence. Our port of call was a poor excuse for a
hamlet, it appeared, but at least it didn't pitch and yaw
every time the gods of the sea got playful.

When I moved closer. 1 saw an inscription on a worm eaten
piece of planking hanging above the open doorway: The
Wallowing Whale Tavern. From within the shabby, red clay
building at odd intervals bellows of "Ale! Ale!" rose above
the din. With the luck of the dice running against me
lately, I was just about down to my last copper. Still, I
was thirsty, and my purse would get no fatter without help.
Shrugging, I went in to see what passed for a drink in this
forgotten armpit of the continent.

As I expected, the place was no better inside than out.
Half-barrels served as tables, and the seating ranged from
milking stools to shipping crates to the red clay floor
itself. Nestling into the red powder at a table occupied by
an unconscious seaman, I peered through the gloom and smoke
for the serving wench. I spied her slowly wending her way
through the press, and staggering under the weight of two
over-full serving trays. Comely once, I guessed, she now
looked as run down as the tavern itself.

As the wench neared my table. 1 cried. "Ale!" My voice, loud
enough to be heard, was echoed by a moan from my unconscious
companion, flipping one of my last copper pieces down her
bodice, I reached for the only clay mug with no flies on its
rim.

I was intercepted in mid-reach by a massively thewed arm
thrust toward the tray by a giant of a man sitting at a
nearby table. In his haste, the fellow succeeded only in
upsetting the tray, showering us both with ale. Cursing the
clumsiness of the serving girl, he leaped to his feet and
struck her. Bone yielded with a snap, and her arm hung limp.
A drop of blood welled where her teeth held her lip, but she
made no outcry.

"Geb's beard," I swore grimly, as he still berated her.
"Wouldst care to try that with one less frail, chum?"

As all eyes turned to me. I studied my opponent briefly ere
he lunged. I saw no promise in assaulting either the huge
hairy chest or the treestump hairy legs, so I ducked under
his outstretched hairy arms and smashed my gauntletted fist
into the side of his snarling, hairy face as he went past.
His momentum carried him over my table and head first into
the wall. The old building shook. He bounced halfway back to
his feet before sliding slowly down to rest cheek to cheek
with the drunken sailor, who greeted him with a belch.

"Anyone else?" I asked the crowd. There was a deal of
talking, but none stepped forth. "Not against a man with a
hammer for a hand," one muttered. 

I bent down and tugged loose a heavy purse from the hairy
man's belt. Turning, I flipped it toward the serving maid's
good hand. "Take a holiday," I suggested, as she caught it.
She nodded, still without speaking, and I took myself off
before the fellow's friends - if he had any - could gather
their courage.

I was walking toward the docks, half regretting giving away
what felt like a goodly sum when my own purse was near
empty, when I heard footsteps behind. In a heartbeat I was
flattened out behind a building, my dagger in my hand. The
wisp of a lad who turned the corner jumped when he saw me
waiting. He looked as harmless as a heifer, but I growled,
"Well?"

Eying the scowl on my face and my naked blade, he suddenly
burst out, "Yawannagitrich?" 

"Geb's beard," I muttered, sheathing my dagger. "Who
doesn't?"

As we strode off down a dirt lane, he elaborated on his
proposition, I was silent until we stood before the gate to
a well-kept yard fronting a small, wooden shack. "We're
there." said the lad .

After a time. 1 shrugged and give him my last two copper
pieces, It was little enough, and if the tale be true, I
wouldn't miss it. If not, I'd take it out of his hide, if
need be and he knew it. I left him then and strode up to the
house of Merlis, a mage of little account (so said the boy)
and what passed for the wise man of the village now that
priests of Geb stayed away. It was Merlis who told me the
rest....

THE LEGEND OF THE RUINS 
OF APSHAI 

For more generations than any man now living could count,
this entire corner of the continent was devoted to the
worship of Geb, god of the earth. Into the area came
worshippers of Apshai, the insect god, who claimed knowledge
far in advance of that possessed by the followers of Geb.
However, it was widely known that this knowledge came from
dark and sorcerous practices, and the Gebite priests,
fearing the results of these grisly rites, led their people
to drive the outlanders from the village.

Fleeing south, the Apshatans were shortly halted by a vast,
uncrossable swamp. Unable to return to the Gebite village,
and unwilling to essay the perils of the swamp ahead, the
high priest of Apshai prayed to his patron for guidance.

Scarcely had he begun his devotions when he was interrupted
by the intrusion of a young girl who said that her brother
had fallen into a pit and did not answer her calls. Although
the priest was wrapped in his own concerns, he did direct
some of the others to search for the youth, but they
returned at nightfall, defeated, convinced the pit must be
bottomless. Nor had Apshai seemed to respond to the priest's
prayers.

Then, shortly after dawn the following morning, the boy
wandered into the pilgrim camp, cut and contused, but
without serious injury. Not only had the lad returned
safely, but Apshai seemed to have used him to give the
solution to his people's plight.

The pit may indeed have been bottomless, but the boy had
landed on a shelf not too far below the surface,
unconscious. He had come to after nightfall and had wandered
in the dark through a series of caves, eventually coming
upon a larger cavern with a salt water beach. There he had
collapsed to the sand, too weary to continue. He awakened to
a light touch only to see a six foot long ant towering over
him. Despite his beliefs, he fled this manifestation into
the water.

As his swimming brought him nearer to the furthest wall of
the cavern, he noticed the water had assumed a greener hue.
Beneath him a glow spread into the murky depths within the
cavern. He dove and swam into the brightness.

When he surfaced, drawing in great lungsful of fresh sea
air, he rejoiced in the restoring warmth of the sun. As he
climbed the rocky face of the overlooking coastal bluff, he
noticed that the water was receding. The clump of red
seaweed which had caressed him as he swam out of the cavern
was now hanging limp from the cliff face.

The boy led his people back to the spot. Behind the drape of
seaweed, they discovered a narrow cleft in the rock. They
had found their new home.

In the caves beneath the coastal bluff, the Apshaians set to
planting the strange crops they knew would flourish in the
underground environment. They hewed out new passages and
reaped the harvest of gems and gold they found in their new
cavern kingdom. They prospered, and their numbers swelled.
The power of Apshai grew in the land. Finally, they were
even accepted by the Gebite priests, who were won over by
the tribute of gems and incense sent to them every year.

The Gebite people, however, grew sorely fretful. While none
knew the details of the dread Apshai rites, dark rumors
abounded, and every year young people disappeared. The
priests of Geb, well satisfied with their new wealth,
ignored their pleas, for nothing could be proven. By
themselves, the people prayed for three years while the
temple of Apshai was constructed within the cavern by the
sea. They prayed for two years more while a plague of
insects from the swamp beset them. They prayed for five
years more, while the priests of Geb continued to burn 
Apshaian incense moss during the Gebite rites, even though
crops failed and animals were barren.

Finally, the people's prayers were answered.

One morning, as the priests began their regular devotions,
the earth trembled beneath them, and a deafening roar was
heard throughout the land. Stumbling out of their tottering
temple, the shaken priests were greeted by the tumbled ruins
of what had once been their town. Following the cnes of the
villagers, they hurried to the shore and ran up the beach
toward the coastal bluff. When they reached the entrance in
the cliff face, a thin streamer of dust was filtering from
within. They peered in and, where the mighty temple of
Apshai had stood against the far wall, they now saw only a
vast slide of fresh earth.

Over the years, the village was rebuilt, and the Gebite
priests renewed their power over the common folk. For many
years the caverns remained seldom visited and always
undisturbed. Generations passed, and memories faded into
legend.

Then, during the reign of high priest Nemdal Geb, a movement
was begun to excavate the old temple in search of the
legendary gems and gold of the Apshaians. A noted engineer
was hired, and first the ancient temple and then the ancient
passages, one by one, were cleared. The underground gardens,
with their strange, sunless growths, were rediscovered, as
were the shops and, finally, the mines of the Apshaians.
Nemdal Geb decided to continue the excavation in hopes of
recovenng the lost knowledge of the Apshaians. This proved
to be an ill fated decision indeed.

Shortly after the fourth passage was cleared, work parties
began to disappear. Soon no one would enter the fourth
passage, and eventually the other passages and the temple
cavern itself became unsafe. Commerce dwindled, and the
population waned. The town was again facing disaster. In
response to the people's out cries, Nemdal Geb led the other
priests of Geb and the strongest warriors of the town in a
quest to end forever the curse of Apshai, They entered the
fourth passage, and none returned.

EPILOGUE 

"And now, my friend," Merlis continued, "only the bravest or
most foolhardy dare enter the cavern under the coastal bluff
when the tide is at its ebb, and few of them return. Those
who do grow in legend to proportions men of mere flesh and
blood could never hope to realize. My fnend, this village is
dying, and its people with it. Soon the last will fall to
the curse of Apshai, and only the doers of great deeds
shall be remembered." He turned his gaze to me, "Dare you
join them in search of the lost wealth still, if the legends
speak true, hidden there?"

"Geb's beard," I murmured. . . .

                     The Monsters
                       of Apshai 

Antmen - These creatures look like six foot long ants
walking upright on their hindmost legs with the other four
legs free for manipulation. There are significant
differences between the classes of antmen but unfortunately
these differences are only discernible to other antmen.
They attack with their mandibles and sometimes with their
forelegs as well.

Carrion Beasts - These creatures resemble squids equipped
with spindly legs, They generally have six tentacles with
which they maul and crush their prey. Their bodies are
covered with a thin but hard carapace and they are able to
travel along walls and ceilings. 

Centipedes - This represents a nest of the little buggers
such as might take up residence under a chest or in some
remote crevice. Their bites are mildly poisonous.

Ghouls - are misshapen creatures with longer than normal
arms, wicked claws, and a mouthful of razor sharp fangs
which they ably employ to crack the bones of their prey.
They have tough hide and stand about seven feet tall. They
are said to eat the soul of their prey as it exits the dying
body.

Giant Amoeba - This creature is a mass of gray protoplasm
which has a strong solvent effect on living flesh. They
range from six to ten feet in diameter.

Giant Ants - These huge insects are four to six feet long
and travel quickly on their six legs. They attack their prey
with their large mandibles. They are entirely encased in a
hard shell.

Giant Bombadier Beetles - are about three feet in diameter
and fly around on a pair of glossy wings. They can generate
a good speed on their little wings and attack their prey in
bowling rushes.

Giant Fire Beetles - These melon sized creatures are copper
red beetles which are capable of generating tremendous heat
within their bodies with which they attack their prey. They
have a thin shell but move about very quickly on the wing.

Giant Leeches - A disgusting rubbery grey, these are two or
three feet long. They travel about on a trail of slime and
drain their prey of body fluids with their sucker mouths.

Giant Mosquilos - have a three or four foot wingspan and
maneuver their slender bodies about rapidly through the air.
They insert their proboscises into their prey and drain the
body fluids.

Giant Rats - are four feet tall at the shoulder and have
nasty teeth. They are dirty creatures and are recognizable
by their musky smell.

Giant Spiders - look like a tarantula-black widow hybrid
with a hairy black body and black and red banded legs. They
are reputed to be quite poisonous as one might expect from
the four or five foot size.

Giant Termites - are two to three feet long and move about
on flimsy wings. They have soft shells and are brown in
color.

Giant Ticks - are foot long ticks and are dark brown or
black in color. They are hard shelled and leap about on
their strong hindmost legs. They drain body fluids with
their proboscises.

Giant Wasps - are three or four feet in length and their
thorax is tipped by a paralyzing stinger. They are very
mobile and will attempt to sting their prey into submission
before burying their prize for future consumption.

Jellies - are formless masses of translucent jelly about
three feet high and six or eight feel across, their touch
dissolves flesh. They have no socially redeeming value.

Skeletal Bats - These feral creatures are bare skeletons of
bats with red ember-like eyes. They have wingspans of two or
three feet and will attempt to bite their prey with their
sharp fangs. 

Skeietons - are the animated skeletons of men which now
stalk the underground passages in search of victims. They
are said to devour the soul of their victim as it exits the
dying body.

Spiders - This represents a whole nest of small spiders.
These little killers are coal black and have white eyes.
They inhabit small dark spaces such as the insides of
chests.

Swamp Rats are two to three feet long and are famed for
their ravenous appetites. They will fearlessly attack
anything that moves or has a strong smell and they eat
anything they can swallow. They come in your choice of
decorator colors.

Vampire Bats - These creatures inhabit the darker
recesses of the dungeon. They are generally black and have
wingspans around three feet. They bite their victims with
their razor sharp fangs and drink the blood which flows from
the wound.

Wraiths - These ghostly creatures appear as skeletal figures
garbed in hooded frocks. Their eyes are fiery points of
light within their cowls. They move effortlessly about
leaving no trace of their passing and are capable of passing
through solid matter at will. Many have died under the chill
touch of their bony hands.

Zombies - These creatures are animated corpses which stalk
the dark passages in search of prey. They sometimes utilize
weapons garnered from their prior victims. They too are said
to devour the souls of their victims as these exit the dying
bodies.

                  The Traps of Apshai 

LEVEL ONE 

LILY TRAP - The lilies give off a cloud of fine powder which
causes severe swelling in your throat.

NEEDLE TRAP - A needle springs from the lock in the
immediate vicinity of your hand.

PIT TRAP - A len foot pit opens beneath your feet.

SPEAR TRAP - A spear thrusts out of the cabinet as it is
opened and then retracts.

MOLD TRAP - The yellow mold on the floor gives off a cloud
of spores as it is stepped on. These spores cause a severe
coughing fit.

LEVEL TWO 

CEILING TRAP - A steel blade descends from the ceiling,
sweeps down the corridor in a long arc and then retracts.

NEEDLE TRAP - A needle springs from the lock very near to
your hand.

PIT TRAP - A ten foot pit with pointy spikes in the bottom
opens beneath your feet.

SPEAR TRAP - A spear thrusts out of the wall and then
retracts.

X-BOW TRAP - A crossbow quarrel fires from the wall opposite
the door as you enter the room.

LEVEL THREE 

CAVE IN TRAP - There are no traps per se in the Apshaian
mines. One never knows, however, when a rock might loose
itself and cause severe damage to those unfortunate enough
to be standing below. For this reason it is highly
recommended that all visitors wear helmets while wandering
through the ancient caverns.

LEVEL FOUR 

LILY TRAP - When you disturb the chest you reveal some
lilies which give off a cloud of fine powder that causes a
severe swelling in your throat.

DAGGER TRAP - As you examine the cabinet a stiletto with a
dark stain near the tip thrusts itself toward you and then
retracts.

FLAME TRAP - A jet of flame roars out from the wall above
the chest as you disturb the contents.

PIT TRAP - A twenty toot pit with a bed of spikes at the
bottom opens beneath your feet. Still alive? Rough footholds
have been dug in the earthen side of the pit.

SPEAR TRAP - Three spears thrust out of the wall at waist
level and then retract.

                      The Treasures 
                        of Apshai 

LEVEL ONE 

T01 - Several of the lilies* can be reached. A vague memory
of the healing properties of some Apshaian flowers prompts
you to pluck them for later perusal.

T02 - The delicate Iragrance of the moss prompts you to
place a sample in your pack for later investigation (see
Incense Moss*). 

T03 - Any plant that glows in the dark must be worth
something to someone so you bag some (see Phosphorescent
Algae*).

T04 - Upon closer examination the shield is revealed to
contain slivers of mithril, the hallmark of magical arms and
armor.

T05 - The aroma of the plant overcomes your better judgement
and you taste a bit of it. It is delicious and builds strong
bodies twelve ways (see Food Algae*).

T06 - Having enough to worry about at present you forego
sampling the mushrooms* for the time being and take some of
each type for future examination.

T07 - Having spent some time up and down the coast you know
of several varieties of useful seaweed so you take some
along (see Kelp*).

T08 - In a pocket of the deceased you find four gold pieces.

T09 - The arrows all have silver points (see Silver
Arrows*)

T10 - Resting in the dirt are five small diamonds*.

Til - Eight small diamonds* lay in the dirt.

T12 - Four small diamonds* rest in the earth.

T13 - Laying in the dirt are seven small diamonds*.

T14 - The arrows have silver points (see Silver Arrows*).

T15 - The sword has mithril worked into the blade, the
hallmark of magical arms and armor. There are also two gold
pieces on the body.

T16 - Inside the cabinet you find five arrows with mithril
worked into the points.

T17 - This much copper has got to be valuable so you slip
the ingot into your sack (see Copper Ingot*).

T18 - Inside the box you find two hundred silver pieces and
a diamond ring*.

T20 - Nothing of value. 

* See Master Treasure Key 

LEVEL TWO 

T01 - After coaxing open the cabinet you find a silver
candelabra*, six silver trays* and a bronze skull ring* with
mithril specks for eyes.

T02 - Fifty silver pieces.

T03 - Oil the workbench you find a small gold ingot* and a
tiny box with two small rubies* inside.

T04 - You stumble across a finely worked shield with mithril
worked into it.

T05 - On a shelf on the south wall you find two small silver
ingots*, two copper ingots* and a tiny box with three small
diamonds* inside.

T06 - Finding nothing of value in the room you pour the
milky liquid into a water skin, just in case you happen to be
dying of thirst in the desert some day (see Milky white
Potion*).

T07 - After jimmying the lock you find five hundred copper
pieces and four hundred silver pieces as well as a porcelain
talisman inscribed with mithril runes (see Magic Talisman*).

T08 - On a back shelf of one of the racks you find a finely
honed blade worked with mithril.

T09 - The moldy sack splits at your touch spilling its
contents of sixty gold pieces to the ground.

T10 - A search of the lockers reveals that aside from rotten
clothing, one contains six hundred copper pieces, another
contains a sack with sixty gold pieces, and the last holds
two hundred silver pieces and a diamond ring*.

T1l - The sack contains one hundred silver pieces and thirty
gold pieces.

T12 - Under the mattress on the bed you find a moneybelt
containing two hundred silver pieces and thrity gold pieces.

T20 - Nothing of value.

LEVEL THREE 

T01 - Two gold nuggets* 

T02 - Three gold nuggets*

T03- Four gold nuggets*

T05 - Five gold nuggets*

T06 - Nothing of value.

T07 - Two smaW diamonds* lay in the dust.

T08 - One small ruby* lays in the dirt.

T09 - Resting in the earth is one small emerald*.

T10 - Laying in the dirt you find one small sapphire*.

T1l - One small diamond* mingles with the earth.

T12 - One small emerald* and one small diamond* gleam from
the dirt.

T13 - One small ruby* and one small diamond* lay in the
earth.

T14 - Inside the backpack you find three hundred gold
pieces, a pearl ring*, an emerald ring* and a sapphire
bracelet*. In a pocket on the body you find a bronze skull
ring* with mithnl specks for eyes.

T15 - Inside the sack you find three small diamonds*, a
small ruby*, a ruby chalice*, a silver chain* and a pearl
ring*.

T16 - A small pouch containing two small diamonds* and a
small ruby*.

T17 - In the corner you find a small sack with two small
diamonds*, a small sapphire*, a small ruby* and a diamond
goblet* inside.

T18 - Behind the large web is a heap o( two hundred gold
nuggets*.

T19 - A search of the chests and coffers reveals forty five
small diamonds*, ten small emeralds*, seven small sapphires*
and four small rubies*.

T20 - Nothing of value. 

LEVEL FOUR 

T01 - Thar's gold in them thar plaques, (see Gold Plaque*).

T02 - The solitary sword has mithril slivers worked into the
blade.

T03 - Inside the box you find eighty four platinum pieces*,
fifty-five small diamonds* and a neatly folded cloak with
mithril threads interwoven through the fabric, (see Magic
Cloak*).

T04 - The body wears a moneybelt with sixty five gold pieces
inside.

T05 - The chest holds sixty gold pieces, fifteen small
emeralds*, an emerald bracelet*, two diamond stickpins*, two
gold chains* and a pair of fine leather boots with mithril
slivers embedded in the soles, (see Magic Boots*).

T06 - The runes on the cover prove to be flecked with
mithril which prompts you to Stash the book in your backpack
for later perusal, (see Magic Book*).

T07 - The arrows have mithril slivers worked into the
points.

T08 - Beneath the body in the corner you discover two large
sacks, each of which contains two hundred and fifty gold
pieces.

T09 - Neatly arranged on the shelves are five platinum
crosses* two platinum offering plates* and two platinum
candeiabras*.

T10 - Scattered in the dust you find fifty gold pieces.

T1l - You find thirty gold pieces scattered in the dust.

T12 - The small sack proves to be more than it appears
holding ten thousand silver pieces but weighing much less
than one would expect.

T13 - The gold plaque* won't fit into your backpack but you
decide to carry it along anyway.

T14 - Two large rubies.

T20- Nothing of value.

                     MASTER TREASURE KEY 

Coinage Valuation 
1 Silver Piece = 10 Copper Pieces 
10 Silver Pieces = 1 Gold Piece 

Baubles 
Gems                          Miscellaneous 
Small Diamond      100 SP     Copper Ingot        20 SP 
Small Emerald      200 SP     Gold Candelabra    350 SP 
Small Ruby         400 SP     Gold Cross         250 SP 
Small Sapphire     300 SP     Gold Ingot         450 SP 
Large Ruby        3000 SP     Gold Nugget         50 SP 
Jewelry                       Gold Plaque       2000 SP 
Diamond Goblet    2000 SP     Gold Plate         100 SP 
Diamond Ring       300 SP     Platinum Piece     100 SP 
Diamond Stickpin  1000 SP     Silver Arrow         1 SP 
Emerald Bracelet  5000 SP     Silver Candelabra  200 SP 
Emerald Ring       500 SP     Silver Ingot       100 SP 
Gold Chain        1000 SP     Silver Tray        100 SP 
Pearl Ring         200 SP 
Ruby Chalice      1100 SP 
Sapphire Bracelet 1600 SP 
Silver Chain       900 SP 

Flora 
Food Algae           5 SP
Incense Moss        30 SP 
Kelp                 5 SP 
Mushrooms            6 SP 
Phosphorescent Algae 5 SP 

Lillies
When eaten, each acts exactly as a healing potion. 

The values given are for the quantites contained in each
respective treasure.

                      MAGICAL ITEMS 

Magic Arms - These items are enhanced to varying potencies
the exact nature of which is unavailable to adventurers. It
is known that certain powerful blades glow with a light of
their own. Beware of cursed items.

Magic Books - These items most commonly increase certain
characteristics of the reader although other effects are not
unheard of. Their effect is permanent.

Magic Boots - Rumor has it that these boots enable the
wearer to run like the wind.

Magic Cloaks - These Apshaian creations are said to protect
the wearer from physical injury. This protection is by no
means absolute.

Skull Rings - These rings have some power in relation to the
living dead which wander the underground passageways. The
exact nature of these powers is unknown but they have
figured in several miraculous escapes from the foul
miscreants. 

Magic Talisman - These trinkets endow the holder with
wondrous powers of mental perception.

Milky White Potion - This is simply a commonly known healing
potion.

With the exceptions of the arms and the magic books, all of
the magic items found in the ruins are enchanted with spells
peculiar to the Apshaians and lose their power permanently
if they are ever taken from the complex.
